[Music]
at the age of 32 I decided together with
a friend to start playing the
drums I wanted to play
Metallica that turned out to be wishful
thinking I turned out to be quite
rubbish at playing the drums
my friend however was definitely not as
bad as me and this surprised me because
both of us had actively played a musical
instrument during our childhood both of
us had drumming classes only once every
two weeks and both of us did not own a
drum kit and we couldn't practice at
home so our environmental conditions
were really quite similar yet she
progressed much faster than me how was
this possible and could I have predicted
this you see I am a behavioral
geneticist I study how genetics and the
environment shape behavior and it
happens to be that my work involves
musicality and music engagement and
therefore I am quite well aware of the
fact that differences between people in
musicality are not not only due to
environmental conditions but genetic
factors also play a role and this by the
way applies to all human behavior you
can think of uh why some people are more
Curious than others how many books you
read if you like doing sports like
eating carrots you name
it so how do we know this since the
early 1900s twin Studies have shown this
and twin studies make use of the fact
that there are two types of twins in
this world there are identical twins
that are derived from one fertilized
single egg cell and therefore they share
the same DNA and there are non-identical
twins which are derived from two
different fertilized egg cells just like
regular brothers and sisters and
therefore on average day share 50% of
their DNA and twin studies compare these
two two types of twins the resemblance
between these two types of twins for
example if an identical twin is highly
musically talented then his or her co-
twin is most of the time musically
gifted as well while in nonidentical
twins if one of them is musically gifted
it's way less likely that their co-twin
is also musically talented then this
suggests that genetic factors play a
role for
musicality and these twin studies these
twin
comparisons they calculate something
called the
heritability and an heritability
estimate tells us how much specific
behavior is influenced by genetic
factors and for music these twin studies
several twin studies taken together
showed that differences between people
are for
40% explained by genetic
factors and this doesn't only apply to
musical abilities and musical skills but
also whether you like to engage in music
how often you listen to music how much
you practice all of these music related
behavior is partly influenced by the
genes that we
inherit this will result in musicality
clustering in families in other words if
in your family someone is musically
talented there is a higher chance that
there will be other people with musical
Talent as well and I'm sure you can all
think of some examples there's the
Jackson 5 there's
ACDC and did you know that the Bak
Family actually consisted of around 50
highly talented
musicians so clustering can also occur
because they share the same family
environment that is of influence but it
will inevitably also happen when genetic
factors play a
role so what can we do with this
information that musicality is partly
influenced by our
genes well researchers need to be aware
of this when we study how our
environment shapes our musical abilities
for example if we want to see how
regular practice affects musical
abilities we can't ignore the fact that
there are different genetic starting
points and that practice actually varies
the effect of practice it varies
depending on people's genetic
packages so you might be wondering now
can I apply this 40% heritability of
musicality to my own lack of drumming
skills well the answer is no it doesn't
mean that my personal musicality comes
for 40% directly from my own genes
instead it says something about a
population as a whole it helps to
explain why some people are highly
musically talented other less so and
some not at all those differences
between people they are explained for
40% by genetic differences between them
and for 60% by environmental
differences so besides the fact that it
quite quickly became clear to me that I
most likely do not possess the genetic
factors predisposing to drumming there
just just the fact that genes partly
influence musicality could not have
personally warned me about my bad
drumming
skills so now you know twin studies they
tell us how much human behavior or
specific traits are influenced by
genetic factors but they do not tell us
which exact genetic variants are
involved where are they and this only
became possible the study after the
discovery of the DNA Helix in
1953 then it became clear that our human
buildup or human architecture is coded
in DNA and the human DNA contains many
millions of genetic variants and many
thousands of genes which are segments of
DNA that contain genetic
variants and years of research since
then showed that you human behavior is
actually influenced by many different
genetic variants and these genetic
variants do not only influence one type
of behavior but many different types of
behavior so there isn't one gene for
musicality for example it's all way more
complex than that but luckily over the
years and after more knowledge was
gained measuring people's DNA became
easier cheaper faster and this allowed
researchers to conduct so-called genome
white Association studies and in these
studies genetic variants are compared
between people to see if they are
related to
behavior so these studies actually tell
us where these genetic variants are for
example a study in 600,000 people
compared the DNA between people that
claimed they can clap in time to a
musical beat and people that cannot and
they showed exactly where in the DNA and
how much these genetic variants were
involved in bead
clapping and colleagues and I have taken
this further and we actually studied
this and saw that people that have a
genetic predisposition for beat clapping
this is a score that you can calculate
once you know the results from these
genome wise Association studies you can
actually take the DNA from everyone you
like and calculate a personal score
representing his or her genetic
predisposition for bead clapping this is
called a polygenic score and these
scores actually predict that people that
have a little bit higher of a genetic
predisposition for beat clapping perform
a little bit better on musical tests
they listen to music a little bit more
often and they engage in music a little
bit more so good calculating this score
for myself have warned me about my
drumming
skills well I calculated this score not
for myself but for Ludwig V bethoven you
might have heard of
him he is undoubtedly a musical genius
and before passing away he wrote a
letter to his brother
asking him if it could be found out what
had been going on with him as he had
been very ill during his life and a
couple of years ago a different group of
researchers collected eight hair strands
through different sources and measured
Beethoven's DNA and made it publicly
available so Beethoven's genetic
predisposition for beat
clapping turned out to be very very low
you practically can't score any
lower does this mean that genetics are
not important for musicality no twin
studies made it very clear that genetic
factors play a role in
musicality does this mean that bethoven
got successful all due to environmental
conditions instead of
genetics no we cannot conclude that
either what this shows us and actually
researchers in my field were already
quite aware of this so bethoven just was
the perfect illustration um is that
these scores these polygenic scores
cannot be reliably used to predict
Behavior such as musicality for a single
individual and why isn't this surprising
these scores actually do not capture the
full picture of genetic
influences and once these genome White
associ a studies which they're based on
become larger they will get better at
predicting and in this particular case
of course also when we measure
musicality a bit more precisely than
clapping to a musical
beat however these type of scores will
always be most valuable when you apply
them to large groups of people to detect
small differences instead of to a single
individual and don't forget of course
I'm talking now about making predictions
based on genetic information this will
always only represent half of the story
there is still the
environment you might be wondering why
bother and use these genetic techniques
at all well it isn't a matter of nature
versus nurture it is nature and nurture
and they are
intertwined we cannot ignore genetics
when we study are environments because
not all environments work the same for
each genetic package and actually not
all genetic variants will come out in a
certain environment in other words genes
and the environment interact and
correlate with each other and these
scores can be used by researchers such
as myself to study this Gene
environmental interplay and how it works
and we use it to actually increase our
knowledge about the development of
musicality so let's say over time these
scores become better and I would take my
own DNA and I would have tested my
genetic predisposition for drumming and
it would have turned out I had
none would I have really wanted to know
no for me drumming was the highlight of
the week an hour of loud banging on the
drums A Rush of
adrenaline clearing my mind and most of
all so much laughing with the teacher
and my friend for me music really is all
about letting loose and having
fun I think we should all engage in
music in a way that works best for us
personally be it to become the best
musician to create Amazing Music skills
or be it for emotion regulation
or be it to have fun and to
laugh I would say find a way that music
works for you regardless of your
genetics because music is really for
everybody thank you
[Applause]